---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-02'
  link: '/en/prob/20240802'

next:
  text: '2024-08-04'
  link: '/en/prob/20240804'
---

# 2024-08-03

On this deal, can you find a way to get rid of your extra loser?

## The Auction

♠️ K4<br>♥️ AQJ753<br>♦️ A975<br>♣️ J

Suppose you are the dealer sitting South. With both sides vulnerable, you have to choose an opening call in first position.

With 15 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, there is more than enough to open the bidding at the one level. You open 1♥️. West overcalls 1♠️, and your partner, North, bids 1NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

In this auction, partner's 1NT is natural, showing a spade stopper and about 6-10 points. You could bid the second suit, 2♦️, showing at least five hearts and four diamonds but a wide range of about 12-18 points. With a good six-card heart suit, the other choice is to make a jump rebid of 3♥️, showing a good heart suit and about 17-18 points. Let's go with that. West passes, and partner raises to 4♥️. East passes. You have another chance to make a call.

You have invited game, and partner has accepted. There's no reason to bid again. West also passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♥️ with West on lead.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td><b>North</b></td>
		<td><b>East</b></td>
		<td><b>South</b></td>
		<td><b>West</b></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥️</td>
		<td>1♠️</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</div>

## Planning the Play

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ Q873<br>♥️ 82<br>♦️ J3<br>♣️ A9632</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ K4<br>♥️ AQJ753<br>♦️ A975<br>♣️ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West leads the ♥️10, and partner puts down the dummy. Partner doesn't have much extra for the raise, but it's time to consider the potential losers.

There's at least one potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥️K. If the defenders' hearts divide 4-1 or 5-0, you could lose more. There's a potential spade loser since the opponents hold the ♠️A. You will be left with three potential diamond losers after the ♦️A is gone. You are missing the ♦️K, ♦️Q, and ♦️10. There aren't any club losers since dummy's A will take care of the singleton club in your hand. So it looks as though you have five potential losers: a heart, a spade, and three diamonds. You must eliminate two of them.

You might be able to avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse or a repeated finesse if East holds the ♥️K. Since West has led the ♥️10, it looks very likely that East holds the ♥️K. It's also unlikely that West has led a singleton heart, so it is reasonable to assume East holds only two or three hearts.

You can't do anything about the spade loser, so you will need to avoid one of the diamond losers.

You might be able to avoid a diamond loser by giving up a diamond trick and then ruffing a diamond in dummy. Another possibility is to establish an extra winner in dummy on which to discard a diamond loser. It's unlikely you'll be able to do that, however. So, the only chance is a fortunate lie of the defenders' diamonds. A defender might hold the ♦️K-Q-10, for example, and the ♦️9 will become a winner. It looks as though the best chance is to try to ruff a diamond in dummy. Let's see if that will work on this deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥️10. You play low from dummy, East plays the ♥️4, and you win the first trick with the ♥️J. Right away, you are at a critical point in the play. What are you planning to do at trick two?

It looks like the best chance is to try to ruff a diamond in dummy. Perhaps the opponents won't lead another trump. Let's see what will happen on the actual deal. Suppose you lead the ♦️A at trick two. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You play another diamond, and West wins the trick with the ♦️Q as East follows with another low diamond.

Unfortunately, West can see what you are planning to do and leads another heart, removing dummy's last trump. East plays the ♥️K, and you win the ♥️A. At least, you aren't going to lose any heart tricks. You draw the defenders' last trump, which East holds. Since East started with three hearts including the ♥️K, it wouldn't have done any good even if you got to ruff a diamond in dummy. You then wouldn't have been able to repeat the heart finesse and capture East's ♥️K.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ Q873<br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ A963</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AJ52<br>♥️ <br>♦️ K8<br>♣️ K8</td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ T6<br>♥️ <br>♦️ T<br>♣️ QT754</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ K4<br>♥️ 753<br>♦️ 97<br>♣️ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In addition to the spade loser, you are going to have to lose one diamond to East's ♦️10 and another to West's ♦️K. That's down one.

On the actual deal, sitting South was Veronica Guy, playing for Scotland for the 2009 Lady Milne Trophy. It was the final round of the annual championship for women's teams from England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, and the Republic of Ireland. Let's see how Guy managed to make the contract.

## Recommended Play

Veronica Guy also got the opening lead of a heart and won the first trick with the ♥️J when East played a low heart. She could see that it was unlikely she would get to ruff a diamond in dummy since the defenders would lead another trump. And even if she did get to ruff a diamond, she would no longer be able to take a finesse against East's remaining ♥️K. So she decided she would need to find a favorable lie in diamonds.

At trick two, she led a low diamond toward dummy's ♦️J! West had to play the ♦️Q to win the trick. West continued with another heart to prevent a diamond being ruffed in dummy. This time, East played the ♥️K and Guy won the ♥️A. She drew East's remaining trump. She played another round of trumps, giving the defenders a chance to discard a diamond. However, West discarded another spade and East an encouraging club.

Next, she tried the ♠️K. If West held up, she would be able to lead another spade toward dummy to establish dummy's ♠️Q as a winner on which she could discard a diamond. However, West won the ♠️A. Having seen East's encouraging club signal, West led the ♣️K. Guy won with dummy's ♣️A.

She ruffed a club to get back to her hand. Then she made another key play. She led another low diamond toward dummy's ♦️J. West had to play the ♦️K to win the trick. West got out with a spade, and Guy won dummy's ♠️Q. She ruffed a spade to get back to her hand. Next, she led the ♦️A and got the little bit of luck she needed. East's ♦️10 fell on this trick. She was able to take the last trick with her ♦️9.

She had made the 4♥️ contract, losing a spade and only **two** diamonds.

## The Rest of the Story

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ Q873<br>♥️ 82<br>♦️ J3<br>♣️ A9632</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AJ952<br>♥️ T6<br>♦️ KQ84<br>♣️ K8</td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ T6<br>♥️ K94<br>♦️ T62<br>♣️ QT754</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ K4<br>♥️ AQJ753<br>♦️ A975<br>♣️ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Guy's careful play of the contract was critical for the Scottish team. They won the Lady Milne Trophy, defeating Northern Ireland by a single point for the championship. As Zia Mahmood pointed out when he wrote up this deal for The Guardian, it was especially significant that Guy won the last trick with the ♦️9. As he said, "She may have laid to rest one of the most prevalent superstitions surrounding a pack of cards."

The ♦️9 is often nicknamed the "Curse of Scotland." This expression has been used since the early 18th Century but there are many different explanations for its origin. One of the popular theories is that the Duke of Cumberland wrote an order to "show no quarter" on the ♦️9 playing card on the eve of the Battle of Culloden.

In addition to being on the team that won the Lady Milne Trophy for Scotland, Veronica Guy has won a number of Scottish tournaments. She has also represented Scotland a number of times in international competition.

## Links

### By Category

[List](/en/category/play/2024#august)

[< Prev](/en/prob/20240802) | [Next >](/en/prob/20240805)

### By Date

[Calendar](/en/date/2024#august)