---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-01'
  link: '/en/prob/20240801'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-02

On this deal, your success hinges on a finesse.

## The Auction

♠️ AKQJ975<br>♥️ AJ3<br>♦️ K8<br>♣️ Q

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is
not. Your partner, North, is the dealer and passes. East opens 1♥️. You have to decide what call to make.

You have 20 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card
spade suit. If East had passed, you would probably have opened with a strong artificial 2️♣️ bid. You are much too strong for a simple overcall, so you could start with a takeout double, planning to bid spades next. You'll then have to decide how many spades to bid over partner's advance. Slam is very unlikely since partner is a passed hand and East opened the bidding. However, you don't need much from partner to make game. So it seems best to keep things straightforward by simply jumping to 4️️♠️, bidding what you think you can make. Let's go with that.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over.
You are now the declarer in 4♠️.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td><b>North</b></td>
		<td><b>East</b></td>
		<td><b>South</b></td>
		<td><b>West</b></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥️</td>
		<td>4♠️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>
</div>

## Planning the Play

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 63<br>♥️ QT2<br>♦️ J975<br>♣️ 8763</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AKQJ975<br>♥️ AJ3<br>♦️ Q<br>♣️ K8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West leads the ♥️4, and partner puts down the dummy. You must now
find a way to take ten tricks. Partner doesn't have much, a queen and a jack, but it looks as though it may be enough to make the contract.
You need to make a plan. How many potential losers do you have in 4♠️?

The spade suit is solid. There are no losers there. There is a potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥️K. There is one sure club loser, but that's all. You can ruff dummy's clubs after the first round. There are two potential diamond losers since you are missing both the ♦️A and ♦️Q. So there are four potential losers: a heart, a club, and two diamonds. One more than you can afford.

You can't do anything about the club loser. In hearts, however, you might be able to avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥️K. Does East hold the ♥️K?

Certainly.

East opened the bidding 1♥️ showing a five-card or longer heart suit. That leaves West with at most two and West would have led the ♥️K holding a doubleton ♥️K.

West has led the ♥️4. That looks very helpful. East's ♥️K is trapped right away. If East plays the ♥️K on the first trick, you won't have a heart loser. Will East play the ♥️K on the first trick?

No.

East knows you hold the ♥️A, so East is unlikely to play the ♥️K at trick one. If you play the ♥️Q or ♥️10 from dummy and East doesn't play the ♥️K, can you repeat the finesse right away?

No.

How many hearts does West hold?

Only one.

West has led the ♥️4 and you have the ♥️2 in dummy and the ♥️3 in your hand. West has led the lowest outstanding heart. With a doubleton, West would have led the top card. So West has a singleton heart. If you repeat the heart finesse right away, before drawing the defenders' trumps, West will ruff your winner. So you may have to leave taking a second heart finesse until after trumps are drawn.

In diamonds, you may be able to avoid a loser with the help of a finesse by leading toward the ♦️K, hoping East holds the ♦️A. Is it likely that East holds the ♦️A?

Yes.

East opened the bidding and must hold most of the outstanding high
cards, making it likely East holds the ♦️A. So, even if you can't take a second heart finesse right away, perhaps you can take a diamond finesse later. Is there a problem with that?

Yes.

Dummy doesn't have a sure entry you can use later. If the ♥️Q or ♥️10 wins the first trick, can you take the diamond finesse right away?

That's unlikely to work out well for you. Let's see why.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥️4. Suppose you play the ♥️Q from dummy, tempting East to play the ♥️K and solve all your problems. Unfortunately, East is too clever to fall for that ruse and plays a low heart.

You are in dummy for the last time. You've already worked out that you can't afford to use the entry to take a heart finesse since West will ruff. So let's suppose you use the entry to try the diamond finesse. You lead a diamond from dummy, and East wins the ♦️A. Okay, the finesse has worked and the ♦️K is your tenth trick.

However, East leads a heart. You know East holds the ♥️K, so you finesse the ♥️J. As you suspected, West ruffs this trick. West did indeed start with a singleton heart. West now leads a club, and East wins the ♣️A. East leads another heart, and West ruffs your ♥️A. That's the fourth trick for the defense. You have the rest of the tricks, but the 4♠️ contract is down one.

It could have been worse. If you repeated the heart finesse right away, West would have ruffed, crossed to East's ♣️A and got a second ruff. If West then led another club, you could ruff but would have to lose two diamond tricks and go down two. So, what could you do?

## Recommended Play

Play a low heart from dummy!

It won't do any good to win the first trick in dummy. East also plays a low heart. You have another critical play to make. What are you playing from your hand to this trick?

The ♥️A!

You are going to need to be able to create an entry to dummy later. Let's see how that works. You draw a round of trumps. Both defenders follow suit. You play a second round of trumps, and both defenders follow suit again. That takes care of all the outstanding trumps. Now what?

It's time to create an entry to dummy. You lead your low heart to dummy's ♥️10. West shows out, as you knew would happen, and East wins the ♥️K. East takes a trick with the ♣️A. East continues with a club, and you ruff. Now you get to dummy with the entry you created, the ♥️Q. You use the entry to try the diamond finesse by leading a low
diamond toward the ♦️K. As you hoped, East has the ♦️A. You have the rest of the tricks. You lost a heart, a club, and a diamond, but that's all.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 63<br>♥️ QT2<br>♦️ J975<br>♣️ 8763</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ T8<br>♥️ 4<br>♦️ QT432<br>♣️ KT542</td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ 42<br>♥️ K98765<br>♦️ A6<br>♣️ AJ9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AKQJ975<br>♥️ AJ3<br>♦️ Q<br>♣️ K8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Before playing to the first trick, it's time to do your detective work. The auction and the opening lead warn you of the danger that West's ♥️4 is a singleton. That tells you that it won't help to win the first trick with dummy's ♥️10 or ♥️Q. You'll be in dummy too soon. You need to draw the defenders' trumps before you can take a
finesse. So you must give up on the heart finesse and hope that East holds the ♦️A, which is likely based on the auction... and your only real chance. To take the diamond finesse after trumps have been drawn, you will need an entry to dummy, and that can only come from the heart suit. To create a later entry to dummy, you must win the first trick with the ♥️A. By unblocking the heart suit, you can later force an entry to dummy with the ♥️Q-10.

As is usually the case, the key is to make your plan before playing to
the first trick. Afterwards, it may be too late.



## Links

### Sort By Category

[List](/en/category/play/2024#august)

[< Prev](/en/prob/20240801) | Next > 

### Sort By Date

[Calendar](/en/date/2024#august)

