---
prev: false

next:
  text: '2024-08-02'
  link: '/en/prob/20240802'
---

# 2024-08-01

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

## The Auction

♠️ AT98<br>♥️ AKT2<br>♦️ K5<br>♣️ Q43

You are the dealer sitting South with both sides vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a perfectly balanced hand with 16 high-card points, ideal for a 1NT opening bid when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West passes. Partner, North, raises to 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

You have nothing more to say. Partner has decided the partnership belongs in game in notrump.

West also passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT with West on lead.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td><b>North</b></td>
		<td><b>East</b></td>
		<td><b>South</b></td>
		<td><b>West</b></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</div>

## Planning the Play

<table>
    <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
    </colgroup>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ J7<br>♥️ J43<br>♦️ T93<br>♣️ AK752</td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
	<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
    <td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W    E<br>S</pre></td>
	<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
</tr>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ AT98<br>♥️ AKT2<br>♦️ K5<br>♣️ Q43</td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

West leads the ♦️4. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find a way to take the nine tricks needed to make the contract.

As declarer, you start by counting the number of winners you have. You have one sure spade trick, the ♠️A. There are two sure heart tricks, the ♥️A and ♥️K. There are three sure club tricks, the ♣A, ♣K, and ♣️Q. You don't start with any sure diamond tricks. However, West has led a diamond, So you are going to get a trick with the ♦K no matter what East plays to the first trick. You start with seven tricks: a spade, two hearts, three clubs, and a diamond. You need to develop two more tricks to make the contract.

In spades, there is the possibility of a repeated finesse. You can lead the ♠️J from dummy. If it is covered with the ♠️K or ♠️Q, you can win the ♠️A and then promote two more winners. If East plays low and West wins with the ♠️K or ♠️Q, you can repeat the finesse by leading the ♠️7 from dummy. If West holds both the ♠️K and ♠️Q, you will finish with one promoted winner. If East holds either the ♠️K or ♠️Q, you will get at least one extra trick. If East holds both the ♠️K and ♠️Q or either honor with only one or two low spades, you will get two extra tricks.

In hearts, you will get an additional trick with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥️Q. Even if the finesse loses, you will have promoted an extra winner. If the hearts divide favorably, you can also get an extra trick through length.

You will get two extra tricks in the club suit through length if the five missing clubs are divided 3-2. Even if they are divided 4-1, you can develop one extra trick by giving up a trick to the opponents.

You aren't going to get more than one trick in diamonds, but there are enough possibilities in the other three suits to create the extra winners you need.

Is there any danger?

Yes.

West has led a diamond. If the defenders' eight diamonds are divided 4-4, you can afford to give up one trick since they will have only three diamond winners to take after you get a trick with the ♦️K. If the defenders' diamonds are divided 5-3 or perhaps worse, you can't afford to give up any tricks. The defenders will have enough winners
to defeat the contract. So your options may be limited depending on how the defenders' diamonds are divided. Let's see how the play starts off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦️4, you play low from dummy, and East wins the ♦️A. You follow with the ♦️5. As you expected, your ♦️K is now a winner. East leads back the ♦️8. You win the ♦️K as West follows with the ♦️2 and dummy with the ♦️9. Can you tell how the defenders' diamonds are divided?

Yes.

West led the ♦️4, presumably fourth best, and played the ♦️2 on the
second round of the suit. Since the ♦️3 was originally in dummy, West must have started with a five-card diamond suit. East must have started with three diamonds, winning the ♦️A and returning the ♦️8, top of the remaining doubleton. If the defenders' diamonds are divided 5-3, does that have an impact on your options for developing the extra tricks you need?

Yes.

You can't afford to give up a trick to the defenders. That rules out the spade suit. It would also be risky to play the heart suit since you can't afford to lose a trick to the ♥️Q. That leaves only the club suit. That should be okay. If the defenders' clubs are divided 3-2, you will have the extra tricks you need without giving up the lead.

Suppose you play the ♣️Q. Both defenders follow suit. You continue with a club to dummy's ♣️K. East follows suit, but West shows out. That's not good. The clubs have divided 4-1 and you can't afford to
give up a trick to establish an extra winner. What now?

The option left is the heart suit. You need four heart tricks. How should you start the suit?

You should play a low heart to your ♥️A, or ♥️K, in case West holds the singleton ♥️Q. Both defenders follow with low hearts, however. You cross back to dummy with the ♣️A. You are at the critical point in the play. What are you playing next?

The heart finesse is better than playing the ♥️K, hoping West started with a doubleton ♥️Q.

It may seem best to lead dummy's ♥️J so you can repeat the finesse if necessary. Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you lead dummy's ♥️J. West covers with the ♥️Q, and you win the ♥️K. That's good, the finesse has worked. That gives you one of the extra tricks you need. Now, if the defenders' hearts are divided 3-3, you will have the second extra trick you need. You play the ♥️10. West follows suit, but East shows out, discarding a spade. Too bad.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table>
    <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
    </colgroup>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ J7<br>♥️ <br>♦️ T<br>♣️ 75</td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
	<td>♠️ K<br>♥️ 9<br>♦️ QJ7<br>♣️ </td>
    <td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W    E<br>S</pre></td>
	<td>♠️ Q32<br>♥️ <br>♦️ 6<br>♣️ J</td>
</tr>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ AT98<br>♥️ 2<br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

You still have a trick with the ♠️A, but that's all. You have only eight tricks. The defenders have the rest, and 3NT is down one. It's too bad neither the clubs nor hearts divided favorably, but at least the heart finesse worked. Could you have done better?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦️4, and East wins the first trick with the ♦️A, promoting your ♦️K to a winner. When East returns a diamond, you have no choice but to play the ♦️K. Since West has played the ♦️2 on this trick, you now know West started with five diamonds and East three. So you can't afford to give up the lead to the defenders while establishing your own winners. The opponents will have four diamond tricks to take and defeat you right away. Not wanting to have to take a heart finesse, you hope you can rely on the club suit to give you the two extra tricks if the missing clubs are divided 3-2. You play the ♣️Q, and both defenders follow suit. You continue with a club to the ♣️K. West, however, shows out on this trick. What now?

With the clubs breaking badly, you need to rely on four tricks from the heart suit. You can take a trick with the ♥️A, and then cross back to dummy's ♣️A to try the heart finesse. However, it is important to lead the correct heart from dummy.

You should lead the ♥️4! If East follows with a low heart, you plan to finesse the ♥️10, hoping East has the ♥️Q. After winning the trick, you will then play the ♥️K and hope the missing hearts are divided 3-3. But leading the low heart gives you an extra chance. On the actual deal, East's ️️♥️Q appears, and you win with the ♥️K. East started with a doubleton ♥️Q. Now you can take a trick with dummy's ♥️J. You didn't "waste" it. You come back to your hand with the ♠️A. The ♥️10 is your ninth trick. The opponents have the rest, but you've made the contract with a spade, a diamond, three clubs, and **four** heart tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete layout.

<table>
    <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
        <col style="width: 33.33%;">
    </colgroup>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ J7<br>♥️ J43<br>♦️ T93<br>♣️ AK752</td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
	<td>♠️ K65<br>♥️ 9865<br>♦️ QJ742<br>♣️ T</td>
    <td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W    E<br>S</pre></td>
	<td>♠️ Q432<br>♥️ Q7<br>♦️ A86<br>♣️ J986</td>
</tr>
  <tr>
	<td></td>
	<td>♠️ AT98<br>♥️ AKT2<br>♦️ K5<br>♣️ Q43</td>
	<td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

Since you don't hold the ♥️9, you can't afford to lead the ♥️J from
dummy. If you lead the ♥️J and East plays the ♥️Q, you will lose a trick to the ♥️9 when hearts don't divide 3-3. Leading a low heart costs nothing. It gives you four tricks when East holds the doubleton ♥️Q - as on the actual deal - and when East started with three cards including the ♥️Q.

What if the layout were different, and East started with four hearts including the ♥️Q?

Then there would be nothing you could do. It wouldn't help to lead the ♥️J. East would cover with the ♥️Q, forcing you to win the ♥️K. Now, you would still have to lose a trick to East's ♥️9.

You were unlucky that the clubs didn't divide 3-2, as you might expect. However, you were lucky that East held the ♥️Q. But you didn't need the extra luck of the defenders' hearts being divided 3-3... so long as you handled the heart suit carefully.

## Links

### Sort By Category

[List](/en/category/play/2024#august)

< Prev | [Next >](/en/prob/20240802) 

### Sort By Date

[Calendar](/en/date/2024#august)

