---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-04'
  link: '/en/prob/20240804'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-05

In today's column, can you find a way to make an ambitious contract?

## The Auction

♠️ AK5<br>♥️ KQ94<br>♦️ AK<br>♣️ AK74

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

There are 26 high-card points. Although the hand is balanced, it is too strong to open 2NT which would show only 20-21 points. Instead, you start with a strong artificial 2♣️ opening. West passes. North responds 2◆, which the partnership has agreed to play as an artificial waiting bid. East passes. It's time to choose a rebid.

You can now describe the hand by making a jump rebid of 3NT. A 2NT rebid would show only 22-24 points. The jump to 3NT shows a balanced hand of 25-27 points. West passes. North raises to 6NT, and East passes. There is another chance to select a call.

You have described the hand and partner has decided How High and Where the partnership belongs. Partner has enough to go for a small slam in notrump. You have nothing more to say other than pass. West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 6NT.

<div style="text-align: center;">
<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
		<col style="width: 25%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td><b>North</b></td>
		<td><b>East</b></td>
		<td><b>South</b></td>
		<td><b>West</b></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>
</div>

## Planning the Play

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ J73<br>♥️ AT<br>♦️ JT952<br>♣️ 832</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AK5<br>♥️ KQ94<br>♦️ AK<br>♣️ AK74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West leads the ♠️10. Partner has a balanced hand with 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit, an aggressive raise to slam after you showed about 26 points. Making 6NT requires twelve tricks. Playing in notrump, begin by counting the sure tricks.

There are two sure spade tricks, the ♠️A and ♠️K. There are three sure heart tricks, dummy's ♥️A and your ♥️K-Q. There are two sure club tricks, your ♣️A and ♣️K. There are two sure diamond winners, the ♦️A and ♦️K in your hand. That's a total of nine winners: two spades, three hearts, two clubs, and two diamonds. Three more tricks are needed to make the contract.

West has led the ♠️10. If West has led from a holding that includes the ♠️Q, you can win dummy's ♠️J at trick one. The alternative is to play low and hope a defender - presumably East - started with a singleton or doubleton ♠️Q.

In hearts, you will get an extra trick if the ♥️J falls singleton, doubleton, or tripleton. Alternatively, you can take a finesse against either defender for the missing ♥️J.

The club suit will provide an extra trick through length if the six missing clubs divide 3-3.

The diamond suit will provide three extra winners if the ♦️Q falls singleton or doubleton under the ♦️A-K. If the ♦️Q doesn't fall under the ♦️A-K, you can promote two additional diamond winners by driving out the ♦️Q.

So there appear to be chances for extra tricks in every suit. Will that be enough to bring home the contract?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ️♠️10. Suppose you decide to play dummy's ️️♠️️J on this trick, hoping West has led from a holding headed by the ♠️Q. No luck. East produces the ♠️Q. You win the first trick with the ♠️A.

One of the chances is for the ♦️Q to fall under the ♦️A-K. You try the ♦️A but both defenders follow with low diamonds. No singleton ♦️Q. You continue with the ♦️K but, again, both defenders follow with low diamonds. No doubleton ♦️Q. You can cross to dummy with the ♥️A. You can lead the ♦️J to drive out the ♦️Q. That promotes dummy's remaining diamonds into two of the winners you need.

East returns a spade. You can't afford to lose any more tricks, so you win the ♠️A. You have two promoted diamond winners in dummy. Unfortunately, there is no entry to reach them. You can take one of the heart winners. When you take the remaining high heart, West's ♥️J falls. Finally, some good news. Your ♥️9 has now become a winner. You can take a trick with the ♥️9. You have two tricks with your high clubs. Unfortunately, the defenders have the last two tricks and the contract has gone down two.

You had some good fortune in hearts but no luck in spades or diamonds. You were able to establish two diamond winners, but couldn't reach them. Could you have done anything more?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠️10. You try the ♠️J from dummy but East covers with the ♠️Q. You win the ♠️K. So much for your first chance for an extra trick.

The diamonds will provide all the extra tricks you need if the ♦️Q falls. You take a trick with the ♦️A but both defenders follow with low diamonds. No singleton ♦️Q. You continue with the ♦️K. Only low diamonds from both opponents again. So much for the chance of the ♦️Q falling. You can still promote two extra diamond winners by driving out the ♦️Q. However, there's a problem. You will need two entries to dummy. You need one to get to dummy to promote the winners and another entry to reach the promoted winners. There's one sure entry with the ♥️A. Where is the second entry going to come from?

The ♥️10!

You can take a finesse, hoping West holds the ♥️J - a 50% chance. Let's see how that works. You lead a low heart and, when West follows with a low heart, you finesse dummy's ♥️10. Success! The ♥️10 wins as East follows with a low heart. You've found the extra entry you needed. You can now lead the ♦️J to drive out the ♦️Q. That promotes dummy's remaining two diamonds into winners. You discard one of the low clubs.

After winning the ♦️Q, West leads another spade, driving out your remaining winner, the ♠️A. You can cross to dummy for a second time with the ♥️A. You can now take the two established diamond winners. You discard your remaining low club and the low spade. You can get back to your hand with one of the club winners. You have another club winner to take. You finish off by taking the two remaining heart winners.

You've made the slam contract, taking two spade tricks, four heart tricks, four diamond tricks, and two club tricks. You needed a little luck in the heart suit, but that was all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
		<col style="width: 33.33%;">
	</colgroup>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ J73<br>♥️ AT<br>♦️ JT952<br>♣️ 832</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 984<br>♥️ J85<br>♦️ Q743<br>♣️ J6</td>
		<td style="text-align: center;"><pre>N<br>W	E<br>S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ Q62<br>♥️ 7632<br>♦️ 86<br>♣️ QT95</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AK5<br>♥️ KQ94<br>♦️ AK<br>♣️ AK74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When the ♦️Q fails to appear on the first two rounds of diamonds, the only realistic remaining chance is to establish dummy's diamonds as winners. To accomplish that, you need two entries to dummy and the only possible second entry is the ♥️10. You have to hope West holds the ♥️J. If the finesse were to lose to the ♥️J in East's hand, the contract would be defeated several tricks. However, a 50% chance is better than none and, whether you go down one trick or several tricks really won't make a difference. You simply have to give yourself the best - only - chance to make twelve tricks.

The contract isn't elegant, but it can be made.

## Links

### By Category

[List](/en/category/play/2024#august)

[< Prev](/en/prob/20240803) | Next >

### By Date

[Calendar](/en/date/2024#august)